This is Ron Shorn interviewing Fred Franklin.
Fred, would you say something for our mic? How
about Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Saturn, and
Uranus?
This is Ron Shorn on April 22, 1993, at the Center
for Astrophysics in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
And I'm interviewing Fred Franklin. Fred, what's
your full name? Fred Aldrich Franklin. And when
and where were you born? I was born in Worcester,
Massachusetts on July 24, 1932. How
did you first get interested in astronomy?
Long pause. Long pause. Well, I had a grandfather
who was interested in astronomy. I never knew him,
but he left a lot of books behind. I had a chance to
browse through those. We had a fairly active
natural history society that urged people or
children to come and visit, and I guess I went
there, and it was quite an active astronomical
group. There was a very good astronomy club there,
and I had several friends who became keen on
astronomy. This is at the age of 8, 9, and 10, and in
fact, three of us made careers of it. We were
together, too. Or Ed Olson. now at the University
of Illinois, and Werner Neuper, who was at
Goddard, Greenville. So these things play on each
other. Ed was a tiny bit older and very good with
making telescopes. So we had quite a number of
possibilities of developing interest. And so it
began in that way. And I must say, the local
astronomy club was very nice. The older people in
that were very helpful toward the the younger
generation, and they incorporated us into their
programs and went observing, looking at eclipses
and having talks and so on, visiting other
observatories. So that was a nice introduction.
Where did you go to undergraduate school? I was
very keen to come to Harvard, and so I did. What year
did you graduate? 1954. And what was your major?
Astronomy. Astronomy major. And your minor? I
don't know that we had any minors. I guess I was a
minor, but I'm not sure I had one beyond that. So
when you entered, you knew you wanted to be an
astronomer. Ron, it's funny. I decided that with
rare wisdom, I guess, that I was not going to follow
the practical dictates of my family, but at least
for a while I was going to do what I felt was fun to do
and wanted to do. I didn't really think of making
astronomy a career, but I didn't think also that it
was appropriate to come to college and plan
exactly what you wanted to do, let's say in a
commercial or business-like sense, I decided
just to study what was interesting and fun. And
always expecting it probably would stop the next
day or the next year. There'd be a knock on the door
and I'd be sent out to the salt mines or something,
but I really wanted to study the things that I
liked. And it was a more a case of good fortune in
terms of timing that allowed me to make a career of
things. What was the good fortune in timing? I
think as I was in graduate school and getting out of
graduate school. And that was for Harvard? That
was Harvard, too. That was as the Sputniks were in
orbit, and suddenly astronomy was a very active
field with much more money infused into it. NASA
was founded, and suddenly many small or
medium-sized colleges and universities were
starting departments. So that there was, as
opposed to present time, there was an opening
market for people who would teach or do research in
astronomy. It was a very fortunate and rare, I
think, business. When did you get your PhD? In
1962. And what was your thesis topic? I worked on
Saturn's rings under the aegis of Fred Whipple as a
formal advisor.
What about the rings? Stability or their
composition or physical structure? Several
areas, really. There's been a lot of rather low
quality photometry of the rings, measuring the
opposition effect in various colors. So I set
about doing that to try to get really good
photometry and to separate the brightness
contributions of rings A and B. So part of it was,
first, the obtaining the photometry over a six
month period. and then analyzing that. And then
once that had been done, looking into the
stability questions, too, whether the rings were
a stable phenomenon, a stable system or not, to
redo some of the Maxwell work, the classic Adams
Prize essays of the last century. So it was a
two-pronged effort, really, but basically
designed to try to get a fairly good comprehensive
picture at that time of the dynamics and structure
of Saturn's rings. When did you decide to go into
things planetary rather than galaxies or
cosmology or stars? It's a very, very good
question, and you'll get a, because it's a good
question, a rather poor or fragmentary answer,
but I'll do the best I can. And perhaps there's no
overwhelming, compelling reason, but a little
bits of motivations here and there. I think when I
was a graduate student at Harvard, it was sort of a
transition time, in a way. It was the Shapley era
had ended, and Donald Menzel was the director. It
was perhaps not because it was a transition and a
number of things were happening. It was not
perhaps the very finest hour of the observatory.
Bach, who was, of course, very keen on attracting
students, left when I was a graduate student. And
in general, it was an unsettled era.
It seemed maybe a semi, well, let's say
unconsciously to me that the person whom I was
attracted to for his science and for his interest
and his thoughtfulness was Fred Whipple.
Dr. Menzel was developing his solar project, was
traveling a lot. There was nothing very
attractive to me there. Bach was very keen on
attracting students, but he was a very emotional
man. And somehow, it didn't somehow quite gel with
me. I liked him very much. I admired him very much.
But there was something that kept me away from
galactic astronomy. Perhaps because he was
thinking of leaving, also He was keenest, of
course, at that time on radio astronomy, and I felt
electronically very ungifted. I was fascinated
by theoretical work. Max Crook was here, who was a
marvelous person, but hard to work with because he
was hard to find. Somehow, it was a case of being
interested in theory and the feeling that Fred
Whipple was wise and good, helpful man. And
another reason was that one of the people who came
to work with him, Alan Cook, was at that time
unmarried and often here, and we talked a lot. And
Alan is a very bright fellow. He's an interesting
person in many ways, but he was certainly always
available to talk to, and so a number of the work, a
certain amount of the work we did was, I did on the
range, was done in collaboration with him. So it
was a case of having good people to talk to and a
certain amount of stability, I think. There was no
conscious decision on my part to study planetary
astronomy. After you got your PhD, where did you
go? It was interesting. I
rather wanted to stay here, but there was a good
feeling that it was wise for students not to spend
too much time in one place. And I was offered a
teaching position at the University of
Massachusetts. At that time, and still to this
day, University of Massachusetts and some of the
surrounding institutions like Smith and Amherst
and Hampshire and Mount Holyoke have formed now a
five-college department. At that time, it was a
smaller number of people, but I was invited to come
and teach at the University of Massachusetts and
join that, I guess it was at that time,
four-college department. I knew several of the
people there. It seemed like a rather nice thing to
do. And as I remember, I was finishing the thesis
with about three minutes to spare. And so I didn't
want to take the time to find applications for
positions. And this one, in some sense, came
looking for me. So I was delighted to accept it. An
old friend of mine, Ed Olson, whom I mentioned
earlier, was there at the time, and that was a very
nice lead-in. So I went out there and had a very
pleasant year. I have to say that maybe two-thirds
of the way through it, Fred Whipple called and
asked if I wanted to return on the Smithsonian
staff. And I was only too happy to accept, because a
year there was fine, teaching I could do, and I
guess adequately. But it wasn't something that I
felt was my great calling. I was rather keen to come
back to work. To spend a year or so doing something
new, say recovering from graduate training, was
fine. But I was very glad to come back. And so you
came back here in what, 60? I came back here in the
summer of 1963.
What research did you do when you first came back
here? keen on working more on the structure of
Saturn's rings, on the gaseous envelope around
the rings. I was also interested in doing more
photometry. In fact, Fred Whipple had a project he
wanted me to look into. And perhaps that was one
reason why he lured me back. There had been some
work on the Smithsonian side on rather
approximate photometry on the Earthshine. And he
wanted someone to work on that and see if he could
make a little more sense of the Earth's albedo as
determined by measuring the Earth's shine. And so
I was able to do that. It was not a tremendously
exciting project, but it was good fun to do that. I
think I was keen on working principally on the
Saturn system, on looking into the satellites,
particularly the rings, the interrelation
between the rings and the satellites. And I have to
say that In my graduate training, I never took any
courses in celestial mechanics. And I began to
realize that if you're going to work in areas in the
solar system, you should know at least a little
bit. So I felt that I should pick up some knowledge
in that area, too. What have you been doing since
then? Give us a synopsis. Well, I have been keen on
the rings for a long while. But I must say, again, my
interests have turned a little bit away from that
to problems related to dynamics, to
some of the planetary satellites. Another
friend and I colleague have worked for some time on
the mutual phenomena, that is, the eclipses and
occultations of the Galilean satellites, the
long-term hope being that we can unravel the tidal
evolution of Io's orbit. We're on the threshold, I
think, of being able to do that, or at least set
limits on it now. But we did a number of
measurements of the eclipses, timings of the
eclipses and occultations to get highly accurate
positions. I'm also fascinated by chaos, by
motions of chaotic objects, and whether chaos and
instability go hand in hand. our chaotic orbits
per force unstable. That's been my keen activity
for the last number of years.
Do you think that people who worked on the planets
were considered second-class astronomers back
when you started in this field? I have to say I can't
give any specific examples, but my feeling is yes.
Certainly in the interactions here, and I can name
names if you like, but please do. I don't think
people would object to this. Everyone
who's been at Harvard will know, back in my day,
that Bach was a marvelous man and very keen on
talking with students and bringing them along.
But he had very strong emotional responses, and I
have to say, as we all do, I guess, prejudices as
well. And certainly from him, as he was the first
real astronomer whom I got to know here, there was
the feeling that galactic or possibly
extragalactic astronomy was the essence of
things. And the other things were solar system was
a backwater, which really didn't count for very
much. And if one wanted to do anything or be
marketable, to put it crassly, you certainly
didn't pay much attention to the solar system. I'm
not sure he put things in so many words, but the
feeling was definitely there. Of course, he was
riding the wave of radio astronomy, which was
developing fast. And he had a very strong point
that that was going to be a major field. And one
might be well advised to become involved with it.
But there was more than that. There was sly remarks
that people who dealt with the solar system really
were leftovers. not probably first-rate people
in general, and that one really wasn't advancing
the cause of astronomy if you lingered too long in
the solar system. I think that's a fair statement.
I can't, again, give you any specific examples,
and I don't mean to saddle him as the only person who
made these remarks. But I do associate them with
him, and I think not unfairly. Do you think that
these days, planetary astronomers have second
class status? Again, I can't give any strong
examples. But I generally feel that's the case. I
think probably with some of the grand successes of
the last decade or decade and a half, that feeling
has been, in some sense, lessened. But I think
that's probably true, that still planetary
people are generally felt to be somewhat less than
in the forefront.
I sort of worry sometimes, at the center for
astrophysics, we will lose this planetary group.
I think under the present regime, that's
unlikely. But I think had Erwin Shapiro not been
the director, we very well might have
disappeared. And maybe there's a good reason for
that. I have to say, in general, I think planetary
people are not regarded as the most significant in
the astronomical community. Where did you get
your funding for your work the last 30 years? The
last few years? The last 30. Thanks, Ron. When I
began here, the Smithsonian really had a mission,
formally, to study what was in the solar system.
The initial wording was that they studied
material between the surface of the sun and the
surface of the earth, which was very restrictive.
Fred Whipple quickly got that expanded. But
still, with Whipple and with this background,
there was still definitely a
feeling that our main concentration was in the
solar system. In any event, since that was my
interest, funding Smithsonian at that time was
fairly easy to come by. I remember getting a couple
grants to do assorted things. I guess the
Earthshine was a grant that we had, and some other
things, too. Some satellite astrometry that Cora
and I had a grant for for a while. But at least at that
time, funding was fairly easy. And since the
Smithsonian's mission was mainly in the solar
system, and there wasn't a great deal else being
done in the solar system, Money came rather
freely, I think, from SI itself, or SAO itself. And
one, although was encouraged to get grants, and I
guess I did from time to time, there wasn't a great
deal of need to do that. In fact, one grant, I think
from NASA, almost sought us out to do some of the
work for them. It's a very different picture from
now. What was your first NASA grant? And when was
it? I think it was do this Earthshine work. It was a
smallish grant, and it was to do some fairly
comprehensive extensive photometry on the
Earth, Sean, and that was probably back in the
mid-60s. It lasted only for a couple of years, and I
think it was a specific request from them to write
the grant because they wanted this work done, and
so we did it and then carried it through.
What do you think NASA's impact has been, or NASA's
money, has been on the field of planetary
astronomy?
I think it's been striking and valuable, and I'd
say enormous. Just to go on from where we were
before, Alan Cook and I put in to join the Voyager
mission. Since we'd worked on Saturn's rings
together, we joined it together. it turned out my
interests were turning slightly at the time, and
it turned out for a number of reasons to be
appropriate for him to do most of the consulting
and be the formal member of the Voyager team. But I
followed along and checked a lot with him, and
occasionally consulted and went out to JPL. But I
just make the obvious remark that without NASA
there would have been no Voyager, and without
Voyager there would have been a totally different
view of the solar system.
Both for Smithsonian funding and for NASA
funding, how have those funding sources treated
you? Have they been nitpicking? Have they
interfered? Or have they basically let you do what
you said you were going to do? Ron, I've been very
fortunate.
essentially on the SAO staff, I guess you might say
on the tenured staff, you can do pretty much what I
like. It's true if I want a fancy computer, if I want
to travel somewhere, I have to get funding, but I
have been very fortunate of having a position
which more resembles an academic position, so I
can do what I like without having to go out and get
funding to maintain myself. So I only need it for
occasional special items. It's not a very good
answer, but you see my position is a little bit
different, because I haven't had to worry about
this question directly. I think you included this
earlier, but what are you working on right now?
Right now, two projects, the tidal evolution of
the Galilean satellites, and perhaps even more
actively, chaos in the asteroid belt and the
origin of Kirkwood Gaps. What, in your opinion, is
the most important work you've done.
I'm enormously excited about chaotic motion in
the solar system. I hope it's important. A little
group of us of three here have been keen on trying to
establish the relation between measurements
of chaos and eventual instability. And we think we
see a fairly successful statistical relation
between the two. It has to be checked further, but
it seems to me significant both in a scientific and
almost philosophical sense. I find it very
exciting, perhaps because I'm on top of it now, but
I really like this and I'm quite excited by it. It's
an empirical relation to date, and one should try
to establish more theoretical understanding,
but I really I have to say what I'm doing just now on
chaos and instability seems to me most
interesting and possibly most enduring. Well,
you also answered my next question, which is what
was the most fun? Most wonderful fun, yes. Did you
ever blunder or run into a stone wall or get
entangled in some swampy mess that you said, oh, I
wish I had never thought of this and never gone into
it? I suppose so. This isn't a very good example,
but let me give it anyway. Both by myself and with
Alan Cook, we did work. And BepiColombo. I mustn't
forget BepiColombo. We did do a number of studies
of Saturn's rings. And toward the end, we were
trying to understand better the structure of the
rings in terms of the resonant interactions with
the satellites. That obviously was very
difficult. And it was with a certain sense of
relief and delight I heard from Bill Ward that
Peter Goldreich and Scott Tremaine were working
on the project and would clean it up because, well,
everybody knows their unique power, but I felt
that I was unable to go sensibly any further, and
the subject obviously needed more insight and
more physical treatment, and it was nice that good
people had gotten into the job and were going to do
that. That's sort of an answer to your question, I
think. I pretty much shot my bolt, I think, and was
glad to turn it over to the major leagues.
Just say the question once again, Ron, and I'll
think again. Have you ever made any real blunders
or gotten into a field where you weren't getting
enough enough wasn't coming and you were hitting a
dead end, or it didn't seem like the results were
going to be worth the effort you put into it? Well,
along the first part of your question, yes, there
was one paper that never got published that was
delightful that it never did. I think it was
something that Alan Cook and I wrote, and this is
back pre-Jim Elliott days. We had a fairly ornate
and obviously fallacious reasoning why there
weren't going to be any rings around the Planet
Uranus. Saved by the bell. Saved by the bell. And we
wrote a paper, which we sent off, and the referee
with great wisdom and foresight said, this really
isn't very persuasive. I don't think this should
be published. This was maybe three or four years
before Jim Elliot discovered the ring.
It was based somehow, I think, on the feeling that
because the inner satellites of Saturn were so
prevalent, they seemed to define the boundaries
of the ring, and there were no inner satellites
around Uranus, not in the right positions anyway,
probably any early Uranian ring would dissipate.
Anyway, we gave the paper a terrible name called On
the Absence of a Ring Around Uranus, which someone
said sounded like a soap commercial. It's quite
right. Anyway, the paper never got published, and
you can imagine with what great relief I view that
today. Where do you publish most, or where have you
published in the past, and has that changed over
the years? I guess most of the planetary work we've
sent to Icarus.
We had a little trouble with some of the referees on
Icarus, and lately have been sending things more
frequently to the Astronomical Journal. The work
on chaos, I guess, has now had two or three papers
there. But this is only,
what shall I say, a glitch, or at least a temporary
change. But Eckeres and the AJ have been the major
repositories. Do you get the impression that the
AFJ doesn't want work such as yours? Oh, no. No.
Well, golly, this was some years ago.
I'm at the urging of BepiColombo, basically. We
went and reanalyzed some of the stratoscope
observations of the shape of Uranus. This is,
again, back before Voyager. Just before, though.
Because of a number of reasons. Anyway, we went
back with new equipment to reanalyze the data of
Danielson. and found that, in fact, we could
improve upon it substantially and derive an
ellipticity or geometrical ablateness for
Uranus. And I can't quite know the reason. This was
a paper of Charlie Avis at the JPL, and Bethany
Colombo, Erwin Shapiro, and I. We sent it to the
APJ, I guess because that's where Danielson's
first work. on Project Stratoscope had appeared,
and it was published without great difficulty. So
I don't suppose it's a journal that was first
thought of in terms of planetary work, but this one
seemed to be appropriate for there, and it was
accepted. Do you think having a journal such as
Icarus devoted just to planetary astronomy is a
good thing? Well, one good thing, of course, is
that it hasn't and all the other major
astronomical journals do, and they're heavy page
charges. So certainly, Icarus, I think, is a good
journal from that technical reason. I agree,
though, beyond that, that I think its focus is so
strictly planetary, but broad planetary, both
dynamics, optometry, its spectroscopy. I think
it's a very, very good thing to have it. I'm very
much an avid reader, although not a describer of
Icarus. When we were graduate students, there was
just an American Astronomical Society, period.
Now there are a lot of sub-societies, and the
Division for Planetary Sciences is one of them. Do
you think that's a good deal or a bad deal? I think
it's inevitable. So in that sense, it's good. It's
just too diffuse now to have one society being
concerned with the entire topic. That, in a sense,
is regrettable, but it seems to me inevitable. in a
sense, the result of a very healthy growth in all
areas. We know, of course, now that simultaneous
sessions occur at all Astronomical Society
meetings. And I still like to go occasionally and
just see some people and listen to some areas that
aren't my own. That the AES meetings, I mean. But I
think it's inevitable and necessary that this
field be more focused. I'm unaware, anyway, of any
great loss of generality or failure to keep up with
things because of this separation.
Not a very helpful answer, not a very unusual
answer, but it seems to me hard to think of the lies.
Well, that brings up the next question. You
yourself, there's a lot of astronomers around
CFA. Do you talk to the stellar and galactic and
cosmological types, and do they ever talk to you
besides saying hello when you pass in the hall?
Yes. Yes, I think I can answer that very
definitely.
Well, I'll just give you an example. I've been
serving for several years now on several
committees, reviewing applications for
postdoctoral fellowships and predoctoral
fellowships. And it's a wonderful thing, because
it gives me a chance to read over applications,
talk with colleagues about subjects that I am
somewhat familiar with, but not very familiar
with. And I find that to be a demanding but
rewarding exercise. So I can say, I guess, that in a
group as large as this, perhaps these stimuli
occur out of necessity. But they're, I find, very
valuable. If it weren't for a little bit of
pushing, I think I would probably become more
narrow. But I think, again, the place as large as
this with many, many journal clubs and talks,
colloquia, and lunchtime gatherings, the
ability to stay fairly general, at least in a
somewhat shallow sense, is there. And that's very
helpful and very nice. What are the biggest
differences you see between planetary astronomy
and this when you started in the early 60s and now?
Well, certainly, the activity in the field is
totally different. Back in the early 60s, there
were very few people. You knew virtually
everyone, or could know everyone.
I think you felt, perhaps, at that time, you were
united by the small numbers game you were a small
cause in yourself, and you wanted to keep the
lights burning.
We've grown to such a degree that that feeling of
being an endangered species, perhaps, is not
quite so prevalent.
I think, Ron, I have to say, too, that as I get older,
I get somehow
the feeling that since there isn't a huge amount of
time left, perhaps I want to concentrate and do the
things I want to do and I'm interested in. So I don't
try to get so involved or so active in causes,
promoting things, or worried about things that
aren't sort of in my first line of interest. And at
present, I'm keenest on the science itself, and so
I'm not very active in committees or meetings or
pushing various agendas. I like to do the science
itself and have been rather selfish in that
regard. What do you think the status of planetary
astronomy is now? Growing, shrinking, or hanging
in there?
Well, I think it certainly grew so and produced a
certain amount, perhaps, of well, perhaps lived
in an unrealistic world. I guess it is probably
shrinking. I do not believe it will ever go back or
shrink to the level it was, say, after World War II.
I think there's too much...
What shall I say? There are too many interesting
problems that are meanable to... observations or
techniques or studies that are sufficiently
rewarding and basic that the subject will
certainly continue. And perhaps that was the
problem back in the 30s and 40s, that there was just
no tremendously advancing technique to solve
many of the problems. Now we do have those, but
maybe they'll have to be measured out in smaller
doses, but I don't believe the field will
disappear or be set back simply because the
techniques to advance it are so powerful and the
people are here to use them. I guess I look in terms
of a settling back, some projects perhaps being
put aside, but the questions are basic and the
techniques are sufficiently advanced that the
subject will not diminish greatly, I feel. Do you
think planetary astronomers have done a good job
of selling what they do to the public? In other
words, do you think they presented their case well
and actually affected the public thinking to any
extent?
I guess I would say they have done rather well.
Again, I'm sorry, I don't think of any particular
probing or exciting answer to that. If
you'll forgive me for just giving you such a blank
and unqualified answer, I would be rather
impressed by what they've done. And I think the
public relations have been really quite
strikingly good. Do you think this idea of selling
planetary astronomy as a practical science, for
example, diverting killer asteroids, keeping
the ozone in our upper atmosphere, stopping Earth
from turning into Venus. Do you think that
emphasis to get funding at the expense of other
problems is good or bad, or the best that can be
done, perhaps? My feeling is that if you don't
argue honestly, you always regret it eventually,
or someone will regret it eventually. And I think
that Killer Asteroids is not an honest sell.
Ozone, I suspect, to take your example, clearly
is. I would only say that I think you have to make an
honest, a brutally honest approach to the
subject. And you will always regret it if you do
not. So I would be skeptical about some of the
selling techniques.
Do you think that the failure to find life on Mars
had an effect on funding for planetary astronomy
in general? Oh, I suspect it did. Somehow a more
positive in terms of life result would have
accelerated our interest.
Maybe we should have made a stronger point that the
changes in the Martian obliquity leading
possibly to periods of greater of unleashing
various internal water supplies still left the
question open. That's a possibility. But
I'm sure the detection of life would mean a great
infusion of money. Do you think the obliquity,
changes in the Martian obliquity may have a
tremendous climactic effect. Oh, yes. When they
first got those pictures showing stream beds,
they said, well, it might be some fluidized thing.
And I just said, hell, it's water. Why not?